#ComputerScience  #IowaStateUniversity #COMS311 


[[Iowa State University]] [[COM S 311]] [[2021-10-28]]

---

# COM S 311 Lecture 2021-10-28

## [[Greedy Algorithm]]

Minimize the max delay problem 


The greedy choice property for this problem 

### Greedy choice property
If $J_1, J_2, ...,J_k$ be the first k jobs in an opt schedule . Then $J_{k+1}$ is a job with the earliest deadline among the remaining jobs. 

- Claim 1: The optimal schedule does not have any idle time
- Claim 2: If there are two jobs A and B  whose schedule causes an inversion. Then there exists two successive jobs in the schedule that also satisfies inversion property.
- Claim 3: For any schedule with no inversion the max delay is identical


### Inversion 
In a schedule if job a is scheduled before job B and deadline of A is after deadline of B, then there is an inversion in the schedule.

### Proof 

Let OPT be an optimal schedule with some inversion. Therefor by claim 2 there are two jobs A and B such that A appears right before B  in the schedule and A deadline > B deadline. 
Construct a new schedule New where A and B are interchanged in OPT. The new schedule has one less inversion now. 

$delay_{OPT}(B)$ is the delay for B in schedule OPT
$delay_{NEW}(B)$ is the delay for B in schedule NEW

*  $delay_{OPT}(B) \geq delay_{NEW}(B)$
*  $delay_{NEW}(A) \leq delay_{OPT}(A)$

A's deadline is after B's deadline

*  $delay_{NEW}(A)  = t - A$ deadline
	$delay_{NEW}(A)  < t - B$ deadline = $delay_{OPT}(B)$
	
max delay for New $\leq$ max delay for OPT




### Comparing

 Interval scheduling 
 
 - subset  of the problem 
 
 
 
 min the max delay
 
 - the ordering of the elements