#IowaStateUniversity
#Geology 
#GEOL102
#Lecture


---

# [[Classes/ISU/GEOL 102/GEOL 102]] Lecture [[2022-01-28]]


## Earth's earliest climate 

### Isotope Review 

- element with the same numb er of protons, different number of neutrons
- Every isotope has a different mass
- Two types 
	- Stable 
		- Do not decay
		- They behave differently of fractionate during physical, chemical, and biologic processes 
		- $\delta^x E$  = $\frac{R_{samp} - R_{standard}}{R_{standard}} \times 1000$
		- Used for 
			- Tracing sources
			- Temp estimates fractionate is temp dependent 
	- Radioactive 
		- Decays 
		- Unstable 
		- Parent isotope decays into daughter isotope at a known rate 
		- Uses Half life and decay constant to describe time-scales of decay
		- Used for 
			- Dating rocks and minerals
			- Short lived isotopes tell us about early solar system (moon for example)

### Podcast 

#### Name a few of the important events that occurred in the first 500 million years of Earth's history.

- The moon formed 
- earths matalic core separated 
- The crust separated from the mantel 
- 


#### What archives do we use to learn about the earliest history of the Earth? Where are they found?

- Rocks 
- Zircons: 
	- Found 
		- Beaches 
		- Within rocks 
		- 



#### How do we use isotopes in zircons? What do these tell us about the early Earth?

We use a mass spectrometer to separate isotopes based on mass. This process gives us  accurate time readings within a million years going back billions of years. The mass spectrometer can also  be used to see what types of oxygen isotopes are in the zircons leading us to being able to figure out what type of climate the earth was experiencing during the zircon formation. It tells us that the earth cooled down and that the hadien period was not hot the entire time and the earth cooled down towards the end and allowed water to condense on the surface of the earth. 


zircons can hold uranium in them. We can then use the two isotopes of uranium in the zircon  to give us two readings of the age of the zircon. Meaning that we have two different time readings that we can cross reference to further increase our confidence in the date readings  


#### What would you expect the early Earth to look like? Is this the same, or different, than what you imagined at the start of class today?






