#ComputerScience  #IowaStateUniversity  #COMS331 
#Lecture

[[Classes/ISU/COM S 331/COM S 331]] [[2021-10-29]]

---

# COM S 331 Lecture 2021-10-29

## I/O property 
of  TMs is a set $J \subseteq \mathbb{N}$ that, for all i,j $\in \mathbb{N}$

$q_i = q_j \Rightarrow[i \in J \Leftrightarrow j \in J]$

An I/O property J of TMs is trivial if $J = \emptyset$ or $J = \mathbb{N}$.

Otherwise, J is non trivial.


Examples:

I/O prop's :
$M_i$ halts on all inputs


non I/O prop's :
$M_i$ has an even number of states
$M_i$ (3) moves the tape head more than 99 cells from its starting position.


## Theorem (rice 1951)
 Every nontrivial I/O property of TM's is $\leq_m-hard$ for CE or $\leq_m-hard$ for coCE, hence undecidable in any case.

### Proof

Let J $\subseteq \mathbb{N}$ be a nontrivial I/O property of TMs. Let m be an index of a TM $M_m$ that runs forever on all inputs, so that dom $q_m = \emptyset$

we have two cases: 

(1). $m \in J$. Then fix $i \in \mathbb{N} - J$. Define f : $\mathbb{N} \Rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ by f(n) = an index of a TM $M_{f(n)}$ that, on input k, simulates $M_n(n)$ and, if this halts, simulates $M_i(k)$.

Then f is computable and, for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$, 
$n \in K \Rightarrow M_n(n) \downarrow$ 

$\Rightarrow q_{f(n)} = q_i$
$\Rightarrow f(n) \notin J$

and 
$n \notin k \Leftrightarrow M_n(n) \uparrow$ 
$\Rightarrow q_{f(n)} = q_m$
$\Rightarrow f(n) \in J$

Thus $K^c \leq_m J$ via f, so J is $\leq_m-hard$ for  coCE.

(2). $m \notin J$. Then fix  $j \in J$. Define $f: \mathbb{N} \rightarrow \mathbb{N}$ by

f(n) = an index of a TM $M_{f(n)}$ that, an input k, simulates $M_n(n)$ and, if this halts, simulates $M_j(k)$

Then f is computable, and for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$,

$n \in k \Rightarrow q_{f(n)}= q_i$
$\Rightarrow f(n) \in J$

and 

$n \notin K \Rightarrow q_{f(n)} = q_m$
$\Rightarrow f(n) \notin J$,

so

$K \leq_mJ$ via f, so J is $\leq_m-hard$ for CE. $\blacksquare$