#ComputerScience  #IowaStateUniversity  #COMS331 
#Lecture

[[Classes/ISU/COM S 331/COM S 331]] [[2021-08-27]]

---

# COM S 331 Lecture 2021-08-27

8:50 to 9:40

## Example of what the class is about 

For an input `J` program that gets processed by `P` program and outputs `P(J)` 

`P(J)` to , for all `J`,  have diffrent I/O behavior from `J` 

Thm:
Can't do it. (No such P!)

Don't trust this. Need to see a proof.


## Strings and sets
Section 2 in text book.

We will usually focus on decision problems.

---

Given a property `P` that an object `x` may or may not have, we want a device `M` to satisfy.

x -> input [`M`] then:
- Yes if `x` has property `P`
- No if not

"`M` solves the decision problem `P`"

---

Given a set `P` that an object `x` may or may not have, we want a device `M` to satisfy.

x -> input [`M`] then:
- Yes if `x` $\in$ `P`
- No if `x` $\not\in$ `P`

--- 


$\mathcal{N}$ = {natural numbers } =  {non negative integers} = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, ...}

Def: An alphabet is a finite set of objects that we regard as symbols

*Examples:*
* {0, 1} 
* {a, b}
* {0, ,1, ..., 9}
* {A, B, C, .., Z}
* {0}
* {$\not0$}
* ...


---

Typically we use uppercase Greek letters $\sigma$, $\delta$, etc to denote alphabets.

E.g, we might speak of the alphabet $\sum$ = {o, 1}

Def: 

A string (or a word, cortege) over an alphabet $\sum$ is a finite squence of elements of $\sum$

E.g,
1101 is a string over {0, 1}

*$\lambda$ = the empty set = $\epsilon$ is 
a string over $\sum$*

---

Notation (Kleene star)


$\sum^*$ is the set of all strings over $\sum$,

Ex:
$\{0, 1\}^*$ = {binary string} = $2^{<w}$

---

The length of a string `x` $\in$ $\{0,1\}^*$ is the total number of occurrences of symbols in `x`.

Ex: 

| 1101 | = 4
| $\lambda$ | = 0
| 0 | = 1

---
Notation: 

For $a \in \sum$ and $n \in \mathcal{N}$ 

$a^n$ = aa...a ( n times)

Recursive def in :

$a^0$ = $\lambda$ or $\epsilon$ 

$a^{n+1}$ = $a^n a$ (= $aa^n$)

---


Caution

$\not O$ , $\lambda$, and {$\lambda$}

are these different things? 

yes!