#ComputerScience  #IowaStateUniversity  #COMS331 
#Lecture

[[COM S 331]] [[2021-10-01]]

---

# COM S 331 Lecture 2021-10-01


To understand reality - To use that understanding to human advantage.

## Logic of nonexistence
(logic of possibility proofs)

A is not regular 
$\Leftrightarrow$ no DFA decides A
$\Leftrightarrow$ there does not ($\exists M$[M is a DFA and L(M) = A])
$\overset{DeMorgan}{\Leftrightarrow}$ ($\forall M$) exists [M is a DFA and L(M) = A]
$\overset{DeMorgan}{\Leftrightarrow}$ ($\forall M$)[M is not a DFA or L(M) $\not=$ A]
$\Leftrightarrow (\forall M)$[M is a DFA $\Rightarrow$ L(M) $\not=$ A]
$\Leftrightarrow$ ($\forall$ DFA M) L(M) $\not= A$

##  proof

For I $\subseteq \mathbb{N}$ infinite and $n \in I$, let $n^I$ be the last element m of I such that m > n. 

Let
$GAPS_I = \{n^I - n | n \in I\}$.
Examples. 
- If E is the set of even elements of $\mathbb{N}$, then $GAPS_E = \{2\}$.
- If S is the set of perfect squares, then $GAPS_S = \{2n + 1 | n \in \mathbb{N}\} = \{odd\ positive\ integers\}$.


### Theorem

If $I \subseteq \mathbb{N}$ is infinite and $GAPS_I$ is also infinite, then the language $B_I = \{0^n | n \in I\}$ is not regular.
$\therefore \{{0^n}^2 | n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ is not regular.


### Proof of Theorem

Assume the hypothesis. Let $A = B_I$. Then, for all $n \in I$, ${0}^{n^I -n}$ is the $2^{nd}$ A-extension of $0^n$ ($\lambda$ being the first), so |$A^{(2)}$|  = $\infty$. $\blacksquare$

### Corollary

$\{0^p\ |\ \text{p is prime}\}$ is not regular.

Let $n \in \mathbb{N}$(just think of $\mathbb{N}$ as a big number). Then 

$n! + 2, n! + 3, n! + 4, ..., n! + n$ are not prime

---

***WILL COME BACK TO DFA AND REGULAR LANGAUGES AT THE END OF THE SEMESTER BUT DROPING FOR NOW***

---

## Computability

1936 A Turing machine ( a-machine). 