#ComputerScience  #IowaStateUniversity  #COMS331 
#Lecture

[[COM S 331]] [[2021-09-29]]

---

# COM S 331 Lecture 2021-09-29


## Recall

$A_X$ = $\{\text{A - extensions of x}\}$ = $\{y | xy \in A\}$

$A^{(j)}_X = \{\overset{ \{y\} \text{Where y is the jth A-extension of x, if this exists}}{\emptyset\ otherwise}\}$

$A^{(j)}_C$ = $\bigcup\limits_{x \in C}^{} A_X^{(j)}$ = $\{\text{jth extension of elements of C}\}$

$A^{(j)}$ = $A^{(j)}_\sum*$ = $\{\text{jth A-extensions(of any string)}\}$

A has bounded ordinal extensions if ($\exists m$)($\forall j$)|$A^{j}$| $\leq m$. 
Otherwise unbounded ordinal extensions. ($\forall m$)($\exists j$) |$A^{j}$| $\leq m$. 
A has infinite ordinal extensions if ($\exists j$)($A^j$) | = $\infty$
CLEAR: "Infinite $\Rightarrow"$ unbounded here ....

## Theorem
Every regular language has bdd ordinal extensions. 

$\therefore$ To prove that A not regular, suffices to show that A has unbdd ordinal extensions.
$\therefore$ For this it suffices to show that A has infinite ordinal extensions.

A = $\{0^n 1^n\ | n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ has $\infty$ ordinal extensions, because each $1^n$ is the first A-Extensions of $0^n$, so $|A^{(j)}| = \infty$

## Theorem (restated)
If A has unbounded ordinal extensions then A is not regular

***Lemma***. Let $\approx$ be a right invariant equiv relation m $\sum^*$, and let $A \subseteq \sum^*$. If A respects $\approx$, then, for all $j \in \mathbb{Z}^+$, $|A^{(j)}| \leq | \sum^* / \approx|$

### Proof of Theorem, using lemma

Let $A \subseteq \sum^*$ have unbounded ordinal extensions. To see that A is not regular, let $\approx$ be a right-invariant equiv relation on $\sum^*$ that is respected by A. By the Myhill-Nerode theorem, it suffices to show that $|\sum^* / \approx| = \infty$.

Let $m \in \mathbb{Z}^+$. Since A has unbounded ordinal extensions there exists $j \in \mathbb{Z}^+$ such that $|A^{(j)}| > M$. IT follows by the Lemma that $|\sum^* / \approx| > m.$ Since m is arbatrary here, it follows that $\star$ holds. $\blacksquare$

### Proof of Lemma

Assume the hypothesis, and let $j \in \mathbb{Z}^+$. For all $w,x \in \sum^*$,  we have $w \approx x \Rightarrow A_w = A_x \Rightarrow A_w^{(j)} = A_x^{(j)},$ the fast implication holding because $\approx$ is right-invariant and A respects $\approx$. Hence, for each $\approx$-equiv class C and each $x \in C$ 
$A_C^{(j)}$ = $A_x^{(j)}$.

This implies that |$A_C^{(j)}$| $\leq |$ for every $C \in \sum^* / \approx$. It follows that $A^{(j)}$ = $\bigcup\limits_{x \in \sum^*}^{} A_x^{(j)}$ = $\bigcup\limits_{C \in \sum^* /\approx}^{}$ $\bigcup\limits_{x \in C}^{}A_x^{(j)}$ = $\bigcup\limits_{C \in \sum^* / \approx}^{A_C^{(j)}}$, 

$|A^{(j)}| \leq | \sum^* / \approx |. \blacksquare$


### Example Applications

1. B = $\{0^n 1^n\ | n \in \mathbb{N}\}$ has no infinite regular subset. ("B is REG-immune")
	$\underline{PF}$ Let A be an infinite subset of B. Then $\{1^n | 0^n 1^n \in A\} \subseteq A^{(1)}$, So $|A^{(1)}|$ = $\infty. \blacksquare$
2. For each infinite $I \in \mathbb{N}$ and each $n \in I$, let $n^I$ be the east element of I that is greater then n. Let 
	1. $GAPS_I = \{n^I -n | n \in I\}$.
	   